well my first guest tonight served as
prime minister of the Palestinian
Authority between 2007 and 2013 Salam
fat is also a veteran political opponent
of Hamas in the West Bank Mr fiad is an
economist by training he's currently a
visiting scholar and lecturer at
Princeton University in the US which is
where he joins us from tonight Mr Prime
Minister welcome to the program it's
good to have you with us tonight I'd
like to if possible thank you thank you
I'd like to start if we could in the
future and then return to the present
when the fighting is over in Gaza the US
Secretary of State Anthony blinkin says
that both Gaza and the West Bank should
be United under the leadership of the
Palestinian Authority can you see the
Palestinian Authority taking on that
role not as it is currently configur I
have written about this before the S
state made the statement he did I
believe he made either yesterday or
today I I just read it uh the concept is
sound I mean Gaza and West Bank are
supposed to be under the perview of the
Palestinian Authority and that's how it
all started and and the separation took
place in 2007 as you know uh but to say
that the Palestinian Authority as is
currently constituted and and configured
uh is to be expected to really assume
that responsibility on on the so-called
day after uh I think that's the to order
but before we get there we have to get
to the day after and when that happens
it will not be a day too soon before we
consider any of these issues the focus
must squarely be on stopping the
Bloodshed I I saw some footage and
images on on your screen and they are
you know for all to see how can there be
even consideration of anything to be
done in the day after until the blood
ched stops The Killing must stop the
destruction must stop and that ought to
be the utmost priority right now the
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu says whatever happens Israel
will maintain security control over Gaza
he said that will happen indefinitely
who should govern Gaza when the fighting
stops if it's not the
Palestinians you know I when he says
what he says about maintaining security
control over Gaza as if Israel has not
been doing that I mean there is this
usion out there that when Gaza when when
Israel quote unquote
disengaged from Gaza back in 2005 that
actually the occupation of Gaza ended
that's not true Gaza has been under
siege for decades now uh even before
2007 from time to time subsequent to
that definitely Israel has been there I
mean the mere fact that this attack on
Israel Southern Israel was possible in
two th in in on October 7 does not in
any manner shape or form suggest that
Israel did not really have control over
Gaza from a security point of view it
just happened and they themselves are
looking for answers and I suppose they
will launch commissioner inquir to find
out what happened but the mere fact that
an attack like this happened does not at
all suggest that they were not in
control they in control of everything
besides this current very serious and
unprecedented of escalation was preceded
by several such rounds beginning in 2006
not to mention flareups from time to
time before then and between those those
rounds but nothing at the scale that has
been taking place over the past month
and few days I'm going to come back to
the president just a moment one more
question though about looking ahead you
know that the US is an ally of Israel
the US is designated Hamas as a
terrorist organization is Washington and
indeed Israel are they going to have to
accept Hamas playing some role in
whatever solution emerges from this
conflict B I have written about this and
let me just you're giving me an
opportunity to explain what it is I mean
what I say the PA has currently
constituted and configured cannot do the
job I I wrote about this before us
officials said what they said and by the
way what what secretary blink is report
to have said about this issue comes
after about 10 days after the vice
president of the United States made a
similar statement uh on an interview she
gave on 60 Minutes about 10 days ago uh
there's something there I think that we
should look into and see what's going on
right there but before that I actually
wrote saying that the PA must be
reconstituted and reconfigured before it
can assume its natural role of being in
charge of managing the Affairs of
Palestinian people on the territory
occupied by Israel 1967 including Gaza
what what do I mean by that I mean by
that a PA that's consented to by the
entire Palestinian political system and
Landscape which importantly includes
factions like Hamas Jihad and others who
are currently outside of the PLO so
that's a fundamental issue as far as I'm
concerned I explained in the article I
wrote why it is that I believe so number
one as a matter of a political movement
they do enjoy considerable support
amongst palan public uh the last time we
had national elections Hamas did win an
outright majority we haven't had
elections since then but they continue
to to enjoy good standing with the
public the doctrine on which the PLO
stood since
1993 uh in fact failed and people saw
that and with that there was a a
concomitant rise in hamas's popularity
and its platform that's the reality that
cannot be ignored so as a as a a
political issue I just don't see how you
really can exclude from representation
factions that enjoy this kind of public
support that's what pluralism is about
how to manage that effectively is our
responsibility and my own suggestion
would be definitely immediately and
swiftly expand membership in the PLO to
include factions that are not there
importantly Hamas definitely Jihad is
also not there should be there now this
body reconstituted and this can be done
very quickly
is to consent to a PA government that is
to be tasked with the role of managing
the Affairs of Palestinian people West
Bank and Gaza you know such
reconfiguration is necessary because if
you do not have that kind of political
backing there is no president government
that can function in Gaza an attempt at
this was made in in 2014 but it failed
miserably so this has to really be owned
by the expanded PL consented to by the
expand PL and then it should be given
the perview to go ahead and and do that
which is necessary to do in the period
ahead but first things first Bloodshed
has to stop Mr Prime Minister but what
you're asking this is a tall order isn't
it you're asking the Palestinian
Authority to basically reform itself and
at the same time to take in Hamas in the
hopes that you can take Hamas maybe
reform it get rid of the the militant
arm and turn it into a credible
political force that's a lot to ask do
you think that the PA has it in itself
to do all of
that well we I need to really make clear
to your viewers the distinction between
the PLO and the PM P came into being as
a product of the O Accord of 1993 before
that we had the PLO which is kind of
really the overall tent representational
body and it acquired the status of being
the so legit to representative
Palestinian people now what happened
since then the political standing and
viability of the PLO as a representative
of Palestinian people diminished in part
because of the failure of political
process that started in 1993 now what
hamash does or does not do to reform
itself Hass is like any other faction
like factions that are within the PLO
there were attempts at doing what I'm
really suggesting now before they didn't
work partly because of faction Rivals
and what have you politics if you will
but if if this is not the time to really
actually do this I don't know when that
time will come it is doable but that's
the PLO it is not up to the PA to fix
the parties the factions that make up
the PLO PLO is like the the umbrella now
the PA is is more of an administrative
body actually under o law I mean a lot
is made of what the pa is the PA is is
nothing but a self-rule instrument
that's what is it's not a state it's not
anything like that it is supposed to
manage and oversee management of the
Affairs oper people must Bank Gaza
that's what supposed to do now absent
political support by the entire body the
politic of of us Palestinians no
Palestinian government of the
Palestinian Authority can assume that
responsibility that's what I'm saying
now it's up to parties do whatever is
they want to do to adjust their
platforms to amend them to not amend
them these are political choices that
they make in the scheme that I offered
there is election there is election at
the end of a transitional period and
people the Palestinian people then will
decide how they're going to be led
thereafter but this is a period of
transition that we really must be uh
definitely engaged with in with all
kinds of ser seriousness ultimately it's
to make those choices you were
Palestinian Authority prime minister at
the same time that a HUD Omer was
Israeli Prime Minister Mr Omer says this
week he said that the way to stop the
fighting is for Hamas to release all of
the hostages in return for an immediate
ceasefire and Israel saying that it is
ready for immediate two-state talks so
you're talking about hostages you're
talking about a ceasefire you're talking
about two-state solution talks that
sounds reasonable on the outside is it
realistic on the inside
yeah uh several elements there first on
the hostages I think there Mr Almer as
well as others know very well that and
everybody knows this there were
negotiations uh there were messages
being sent uh as I understand it Hamas
expressed willingness to begin to
release the civilians amongst the the
the the hostages or the prisoners and
some of that happened in a modest way
uh now they're saying and I I think
there is logic to this what they need is
a little bit of of resp in order to
ensure that they can have access to all
of those who are held cap captive in
different places in Gaza and to ensure
their safe P passage so the Israeli
government I said if that is really the
focus if that's what you really want to
do and you're conditioning stopping the
killing on the release of hostages there
is an easier much less costly and less
bloody way of doing it you know give
that space create that that space in
which the hostages the civilians can be
released that can happen and it was
beginning to happen and my understanding
is that there is still ongoing
conversation C is mediating and I hope
that this will come to fruition but it's
very difficult for me to see now we saw
some images when some hostages were
released it was an orderly transfer
something like the this needs to happen
you need to recreate the space the safe
safety of Passage to make sure that
happens so for Israel to continue to
first to we want to eradicate Hamas we
want to eliminate Hamas and now we will
not stop until the hostages are released
well guess what under this bombing and
shelling unprecedentedly that has been
taking place for more than a month now
those hostages could perish I mean you I
do not know a single Palestinian who
does not know a Palestinian G has not
been killed or know somebody who know
somebody has been killed this is the
mass of
horror that's been taking place in Gaza
for for a month now so I think what we
really need is a bit of Sanity here
there there needs to be IR rational uh
uh uh approach dealing with with
problems and this hote headedness where
it's coming from I I can understand I
don't accept but it can't be policy and
we are dealing with situation when
vengefulness has become policy that's
what it really looks like to me Mr Prime
Minister before we run out of time I
want to ask you I want to apply maybe a
question that was made famous by the
former US Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger when he was talking about the
European Union if there was a crisis in
Europe you know he he posed the question
who are you going to call so let me ask
you um is there a Palestinian figure who
Palestinian people could accept as a
leader now a person who was not
connected to Hamas that the Israelis
could call and that the rest of the
world could also do business with is
there someone that you could think of
right now who could take on that
role yeah uh let me say and by way of
reiterating actually what I said before
we need to come to a point in time when
Palestinian people are going to be able
to make that choice Through The Ballot
Box and and and that's imminently
possible after a transitional period in
which we you know some measure of
stability is is attained that's
absolutely essential which actually
takes me back to the question you know
somebody to call somebody to call in
order for that somebody to be able to
actually to be responsive for for for
that person to really have a point of
view that
matters he or she must have the
representational power to do so I mean
the idea of just kind of really having
somebody to pick up the call and for
some say on me I'm able to do any any
and all that is expected that doesn't
happen things do not happen this way so
that's why the representational
framework of the Palestinian people has
to be fixed right now it has been
malfunctioning it has been
malfunctioning for a while and it
continues and it will continue to
malfunction until that umbrella is
broadened to include all those who are
outside of it that's absolutely
essential now you mentioned something
about resumption of a iCal process peace
process two State solution I think the
one thing that I think no one should be
thinking about is to rush to hit the
reset button on a process that has
failed for three decades to deliver what
what needs what we need is definitely a
new process one that actually starts
given the failure over the past three
decades by a formal statement of
recognition of our right our national
rights as a people including the right
to self-determination which should
include the right the right to a
sovereign state on the territory is
Israel occupied in 1967 minus that we'll
end up in a situation where
transactionally we would enter into
another process another round of
renegotiations and throughout you you
could have problems and you could have
flareups you could have escalations you
could have all kinds of problems so what
we really need if for this to be any
different from what the process has been
like over the past three years is is is
something that's principle something
that actually begins with a a
recognition of our rights as a people
right now we don't have that as a matter
of fact we haven't had that from any
government of Israel not only this can
government not any government that
preceded it it's about time particularly
consider considering the retor that has
been coming out Israel government and
I'm not really only talking about the
current one time and again Min of Israel
said repeatedly that there was no room
for sovereignty between River Jordan and
Mediterranean other than israels now
somebody who says something like this
clearly is not accepting the idea of
emergence of the State of Palestine on
the territory occupied in 1967 so we
really need to have to go to the basics
I draw some encouragement from
statements made by President Harris and
maybe recent more recently Secretary of
State if you add up the words they're
using particularly Kamala Harris about
10 days ago uh she pretty much is saying
what to me means we Palestinians have a
right to estate that would be a good
point to start the negotiation and a
political process from Mr I can
certainly hear the passion in your voice
if if you decide to go back into
politics please let us know former
Palestinian Authority prime minister
Salam fad Mr fed we appreciate your time
and your valuable insights tonight thank
you thank you Brent for having me
appreciate it thank
you